
In this series of letters we have observed that the Lord corrects his churches. Further, we have seen the churches try to defend themselves against the persecuting power of the Roman Empire, from error within, from false prophets and beguiling, sinister teachings that had found their way into the churches. If we were speaking of athletics we might note that there is repeated reference to defense with little discussion of offense. Each letter contains a means for defense to offer protection against various spiritual problems. In this letter to the church in Philadelphia, however, the offense is finally introduced. Here the Lord directs his people to not just hang on and root out the evil in their midst but to walk through the open door of opportunity he had given them. There is no word of correction here, rather a call to advance.

Thus as the offense takes the field in this letter, as it were, we could not be faulted if we expected them to be as big, as strong and hard--hitting as their opponents. Recall that some of the antagonists against whom the churches labored were extremely impressive. Jezebel was a powerful, extraordinary beguiler. Balaam was an immensely capable, charismatic figure in his day. But the church on offense is anything but powerful and charismatic. This is hardly surprising. God's servants are often insignificant shepherds and fishermen, ordinary, uneducated people, lacking anything the world would regard as commendable. These are the people who will, for his sake, take the territory through the open door he has set before them.

The unnamed individual who is alluded to here is Eliakim. The reference to the 'key of David' and an 'open door which no one can shut' was directed to Eliakim in Isaiah's prophecy. Eliakim, a very ordinary man, was a steward in the house of Hezekiah, a godly, influential king in Israel's history. But Eliakim, not King Hezekiah, is the Old Testament hero Jesus recalls to encourage the Philadelphian Christians. Neither does he spotlight Isaiah, perhaps the greatest of the prophets, a Iyrical, powerful preacher and a contemporary of Eliakim. In fact, as a steward in Hezekiah's house, Eliakim communicated messages between the prophet and the king. Yet, it is the ordinary man, Eliakim, not the greater figures--Isaiah and Hezekiah--to whom Jesus points in this letter. The central events in his life are discussed in Isaiah, chapters 22 and 36-37.

Eliakim served alongside the wicked Shebna, another servant of Hezekiah. Shebna used his position in the king's house to feather his own nest, to seek out riches for himself and to sow turmoil and discord among the people. Shebna's influence was only one of the difficulties Eliakim faced. During an attack on Jerusalem by the Assyrians, Fliakim stood on the wall surrounding the city, looking down on an Assyrian army led by Rabshakeh, a powerful commander who laughed at the God of the people of Israel and directed his taunts at Eliakim. Although Eliakim knew that this would have a demoralizing influence on his people, he was not even allowed to answer back.

This then is the man we are reminded of as we read this letter. Eliakim is the man in question in the quote from Isaiah,

> **'Then I will set the key of the house of David on his shoulders. When he opens, no one will shut. When he shuts, no one will open, and I will drive him like a peg in a firm place, and he will become a throne of glory to his father's house.'**

The church at Philadelphia was neither large nor commanding. It did not control vast revenues. It did not have the world changers, the people of significance in its midst. But the Lord brought for them the key of David that once had been placed on Eliakim's shoulder. That is what we are to bear in mind as we study this letter. As events turned out, an angel of the Lord passed among t the Assyrian hordes who ridiculed Eliakim and his God, and 185,000 men lay dead in the morning. As events turned out, the commander of the army had to go back to Nineveh and was not allowed to attack the city. As events turned out, Sennacherib, the king of Assyria, was slain as he worshipped an idol shortly after these events took place. As events turned out, the power of God was greater than the power of the enemy. Eliakim, the ordinary man, saw a great victory won for the Lord, not because of his own strength but because of the prayers that were offered by his people.

    Created at: 2015-10-26T19:49:06-04:00
    Updated at: 2015-10-26T19:49:06-04:00

